# Docker-compose

## Abstract

Docker images are supposed to run single process with single responsibility. For this reason any application will most likely consist
of multiple images working together. Although it is possible to run all these containers using Docker CLI this task will quickly
become problematic and error prone.

Docker Compose is a tool that addresses the need of writing custom scripts running complex setups in imperative approach by
introducing declarative approach through specific Yaml file.

## Basics

Note, within entire aricle `DIRECTORY` will be used in reference to name of directory where given `docker-compose` file is located.
This name is used as default prefix for many components created by Compose.

### Imperative vs Declarative approach

Most DevOps tools nowadays offer (at least) two approaches and usually you will hear/read that _declarative_ is preffered one. What is the difference and why is that?

Imperative approach means that developer needs to run commands creating each element of the target architecture separately. This also means that it is developer's responsibility to handle dependencies between various elements of the system. As described in [Architecture Overview](01.%20architecture-overview.md) developer would need to separately run each container, create network and connect these containers in proper order. And he would need to handle all the potential errors and handle removing of these resources - also in correct order.

Declarative approach on the other hand developer defines how the architecture should look like and it is tooling responsibility to create all elements of the architecture in proper order. In Docker ecosystem this tooling is called Docker Compose. Such approach makes it easier to focus on the actual architeture and track changes in it instead of focusing on how it is being created ([Infrastructure as Code](https://stackify.com/what-is-infrastructure-as-code-how-it-works-best-practices-tutorials/)).

Generally it is indeed simpler to define complex architectures with declarative approaches but it does not mean that imperative is wrong. It still has it's appliances - most likely if you want to quickly check something: writing entire template might be just too long.

### Compose file structure

Compose file is a Yaml file describing entire architecture. It consists of four sections:

- `version` - specifies exact version of syntax used within entire template. Theoretically it can be ommited but it would default to
  version 1 of syntax which was supported only in Composer up to version *1.6.x*. As such this should be considered as required.
- `services` - most important section that specifies what workloads should be running within entire architecture. It is required and
  most complex section - it is out of scope of this article to describe all nuances.
- `networks` - this section specifies networks that should operate within entire architecture. If ommited default network named
  `DIRECTORY_default` of type bridge will be created
- `volumes` - this section can be used to specify volumes attached to containers created for services. If ommited all volumes required
  by containers running within infrastructure that are not covered by bind-mounts will be created as anonymous ones and won't be
  reused if architecture gets recreated.

### About Compose file versions

Compose file versions is in my opinion most confusing part of entire Docker ecosystem. Although number 3 could suggest that it is
improvement to version 2 and old files should be sooner or later migrated, it is not exactly the case.

Version 3.x was in fact introduced to address concerns related to distributed setups using some form of orchestration. Originally that
meant Docker Swarm but with time more tools were created for other orchestrations as well (i.e.
[Kompose](https://github.com/kubernetes/kompose) for Kubernetes). Distributed nature of running workloads means that some features do
not make sense anymore and were in fact removed (`volume_driver`, `volumes_from`, `cpu_shares`, `cpu_quota`, `cpuset`, `mem_limit`,
`memswap_limit`, `extend`, `groud_add`) or their capabilites were limited (i.e. `depends_on`). On the other hand some other features
(i.e. `services/*/deploy` or `overlay` network driver) were introduced.

That does not mean that version 2.x is deprecated! In fact they are developed in parallel and add new features as we go. This is
visible in [Compatibility Matrix](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/compose-versioning/#compatibility-matrix): version 3.0
was introduced in Docker Engine 1.13 - at the same time version 2.2 was introduced. Also some features (i.e. `services/*/build/target`)
were introduced afterwards in both major versions (respectively 2.3 and 3.4).

For this reason difference between 2 and 3 should be considered more a diffent _mode_ rather than successor: version 2.x is designed
to run single machine setups while version 3.x is for multiple machine ones.

### Multiple Compose files

If not specified otherwise Compose uses `docker-compose.yml` and `docker-compose.override.yml` files but it is possible to specify
other ones with `-f` argument. This means that `docker-compose up` is actually the same as
`docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.override.yml up`.

As presented above it is possible to specify multiple `-f` arguments to merge multiple files into single configuration - in case of
repeating values always the value from last file will be used. For instance:

```yaml
#docker-compose-1.yml
version: '2.4'

services:
  ghost:
    image: ghost:alpine
    ports:
      - 8090:2368
    depends_on:
      - db
    volumes:
      - ./content:/var/lib/ghost/content:delegated
    environment:
      database__client: db_client
      database__connection__host: db_host
      database__connection__user: db_user
      database__connection__password: db_pass
      database__connection__database: db_name
  db:
    image: mysql:5
    volumes:
      - db:/var/lib/mysql
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: password
volumes:
  db: {}

#docker-compose-2.yml
version: '2.4'

services:
  ghost: 
    environment: 
      database__connection__user: foo
    ports:
      - 9090:2368
  background:
    image: busybox
    command: bash -c "while [ true ]; do echo 1; sleep 1; done;"╭
```

When we run `docker-compose -f docker-compose.1.yml -f docker-compose.2.yml config` that verifies configuration and generates result
as a single yml definition, we get:

```yaml
$> docker-compose -f docker-composeconfig
services:
  background:
    command: bash -c "while [ true ]; do echo 1; sleep 1; done;"
    image: busybox
  db:
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: password
    image: mysql:5
    volumes:
    - db:/var/lib/mysql:rw
  ghost:
    depends_on:
      db:
        condition: service_started
    environment:
      database__client: db_client
      database__connection__database: db_name
      database__connection__host: db_host
      database__connection__password: db_pass
      database__connection__user: foo
    image: ghost:alpine
    ports:
    - 8090:2368/tcp
    - 9090:2368/tcp
    volumes:
    - /home/tkaplonski/training/course materials/compose/multiple-compose/content:/var/lib/ghost/content:delegated
version: '2.4'
volumes:
  db: {}
```

As you can see `database__connection__user` value in `ghost` comes from `docker-compose.2.yml` file. In addition resulting file
contains services from both files.

Above can be used to build complex setups consisting of semi-independent modules in a simple way. In Sitewards we often use separate
compose file for base tools like `Traefik` (i.e. `docker-compose.tools.yml`) and separate for actual application like `Magento` (i.e.
`docker-compose.magento.yml`). To facilitate further use you can actually add `docker-compose.yml` file to `.gitignore` and generate
it dynamically on startup:

```bash
╰⎼$ tree -a
.
├── deploy
│   ├── docker-compose.magento.yml
│   └── docker-compose.tools.yml
├── .gitignore
└── src
    └── magento

3 directories, 3 files
╰⎼$ cat .gitignore 
docker-compose.yml
╰⎼$ docker-compose -f deploy/docker-compose.tools.yml -f deploy/docker-compose.magento.yml config > docker-compose.yml
╰⎼$ docker-compose up
```

## Good Practices and tips

### Don't explicitly define default values

Most Compose file sections come with reasonable default values. There's no reason to explicitly define their values if you need
default ones (i.e. single bridge network). Instead just ommit the parameter and let Docker Compose use default setting.

### Use environment variables

Docker Compose allows use of variables within yaml files. Values for these variables can be coming from environment variables or
`.env` file. In addition, variables can use default values using YAML syntax `${VARIABLE:-default}`

```bash
╰⎼$ cat docker-compose.yml
version: '2.4'

services:

  ghost:
    image: ghost:alpine
    ports:
      - 8090:2368
    depends_on:
      - db
    volumes:
      - ./content:/var/lib/ghost/content:delegated
    environment:
      database__client: ${DB_CLIENT}
      database__connection__host: ${DB_HOST}
      database__connection__user: ${DB_USER}
      database__connection__password: ${DB_PASS}
      database__connection__database: ${DB_NAME}

  db:
    image: mysql:${MYSQL_VERSION:-5}
    volumes:
      - db:/var/lib/mysql
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: ${DB_PASS}

volumes:
  db: {}

╰⎼$ cat .env
DB_CLIENT=mysql
DB_HOST=db
DB_USER=user
DB_PASS=pass

╰⎼$ DB_NAME=coming-from-env docker-compose config
services:
  db:
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: pass
    image: mysql:5
    volumes:
    - db:/var/lib/mysql:rw
  ghost:
    depends_on:
      db:
        condition: service_started
    environment:
      database__client: mysql
      database__connection__database: coming-from-env
      database__connection__host: db
      database__connection__password: pass
      database__connection__user: user
    image: ghost:alpine
    ports:
    - 8090:2368/tcp
    volumes:
    - /home/tkaplonski/training/course materials/compose/multiple-compose/tmp/content:/var/lib/ghost/content:delegated
version: '2.4'
volumes:
  db: {}
```

### Consider resuing commong fragments

Yaml format supports templates through various anchors. This can be used to avoid repetition of the same blocks in multiple services:

```bash
╰⎼$ cat docker-compose.yml 
version: '2.4'

x-logging:
  &custom-logging
    options: 
      max-size: '1m' 
      max-file: '5'
services:

  ghost:
    image: ghost:alpine
    ports:
      - 8090:2368
    depends_on:
      - db
    volumes:
      - ./content:/var/lib/ghost/content:delegated
    environment:
      database__client: ${DB_CLIENT}
      database__connection__host: ${DB_HOST}
      database__connection__user: ${DB_USER}
      database__connection__password: ${DB_PASS}
      database__connection__database: ${DB_NAME}
    logging: *custom-logging

  db:
    image: mysql:${MYSQL_VERSION:-5}
    volumes:
      - db:/var/lib/mysql
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: ${DB_PASS}
    logging: *custom-logging

volumes:
  db: {}

╰⎼$ docker-compose config
services:
  db:
    environment:
      MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD: YOURDBPASSWORDhere
    image: mysql:5
    logging:
      options:
        max-file: '5'
        max-size: 1m
    volumes:
    - db:/var/lib/mysql:rw
  ghost:
    depends_on:
      db:
        condition: service_started
    environment:
      database__client: mysql
      database__connection__database: ghost
      database__connection__host: db
      database__connection__password: YOURDBPASSWORDhere
      database__connection__user: root
    image: ghost:alpine
    logging:
      options:
        max-file: '5'
        max-size: 1m
    ports:
    - 8090:2368/tcp
    volumes:
    - /home/tkaplonski/training/course materials/compose/template/content:/var/lib/ghost/content:delegated
version: '2.4'
volumes:
  db: {}
```
